what is up guys karma medic here a
little bit closer yeah I think so what
is up guys karma medic here and welcome
back to another
[Music]
[Applause]
I'm ready here and welcome back to
another dose come back today with
another banger mm my video today I'm
going to be covering ethical dilemmas
which is a really highly requested topic
here on the channel if you need to the
channel my name is Nasir I'm a second
year medical student at King's College
London and I make these banging videos
every single week so do consider liking
this video and subscribing to my channel
if you want to see more videos from me
on my medical school journey also you
can follow me on instagram at karma
medic I'm done throwing Klug's around
let's get straight into the video so
today's topic is ethical dilemmas in MMI
interviews and the first thing you're
gonna want to do for these types of
questions is do your research so you
want to do research to see what kinds of
questions tend to come up every single
year surrounding ethical dilemmas
because they will likely come up again
second thing is that you really want to
show your decision making or flow of
logic throughout the question when
you're answering it a lot of the time
there isn't going to be a very clear-cut
answer and what's more important than
the final decision that you come to is
how you arrived at that decision so I
would make a point to walk the
interviewers through your thinking why
is it that I'm making this decision why
is it that I'm not making that decision
medical decision making for ethical
dilemmas almost always is very logical
fair and rational so you don't want to
involve in motion at any point in your
decision making however you do want to
be able to show that this is an ethical
dilemma there is a lot of emotion
involved and it's not a clear-cut simple
easy decision to make and in fact it can
be very difficult and have a lot of
emotion even though you shouldn't use
that in the decision-making before
bringing up any red flags or saying
anything that could do harm to the
patient or shows that you have a lack of
empathy and you should be fine alright
so now let's jump straight into the
question I'll put a picture of it up on
the screen maybe somewhere here is
probably good shift a bit this way so
you guys can see it clearly I'll put a
picture up on the screen so that you
guys can follow the question as we go
along now this question is going to be
based off of a discussion that we had
with a consultant at King's College
Hospital when I was on the renal ward so
quick disclaimer this ethical dilemma
may be a little bit more complicated and
a little bit more difficult than the
standard MMI
you'd expect to see an interview but to
the important thing that you take away
from this video is the thought process
of going through the dilemma and all the
different factors that you need to
consider when thinking about ethical
dilemmas generally we're going to be
covering all kinds of important
considerations to think about with the
NHS and also with the main medical
ethics pillars so stick around to the
end of the video so you make sure you
get information on all those things okay
so without further ado let's jump
straight into the question so this
question revolves around how we can
allocate cadaveric kidneys fairly so
cadaveric kidneys are kidneys that come
from people who have passed away
miss eggs is a 29 year old patient in
the general nephrology clinic with the
GFR of 28 milliliters per minute who has
had type 1 diabetes since she was 7 so
I'm just gonna stop the question there
for a second
GFR stands for glomerular filtration
rate and within the kidney within the
nephrons you have a glomerulus which
filters all of the blood through it and
then that filtrate passes through the
loop of Henle and the different
convoluted tubules and then eventually
gets to the collecting duct
so the glomerular filtration rate is the
rate at which fluid is passing through
that glomerular Mela uterus go Mel you
release the GFR is the rate at which
fluid is passing through the gloom
Melanie Lewis now the reason that's
important for this question is that GFR
is a proxy or it is an estimate of
kidney function so the lower your gf are
the worst kidney function you're gonna
have and generally for a person of about
30 years old the normal GFR is going to
be somewhere between 90 and 120 it's
always in a range and it depends on your
age but generally speaking let's say
that's the normal value so we can see
that this person clearly has a decreased
GFR meaning they have a decreased kidney
function so the next part of the
question she asks to be transferred to
the pre dialysis clinic which is
normally done at a GFR of 20 or less in
order to be placed on the renal
transplant list ASAP she hopes to
receive a cadaveric transplant quickly
to be able to try for pregnancy normally
people are only put on the transplant
list when they reach a GFR of 15 how do
you approach this situation so this is
obviously quite a complicated question
there's a lot of things going on so I
think we should break it down into
smaller pieces and just start asking
ourselves some questions and
can add some important factors so first
of all why do we only place people on
the transplant list when they have a GFR
of 15 or less now the reason for that
and the reason that the threshold has
been set at 15 GFR is that this is the
point at which a patient is actually
going to need a transplant before they
reach a GFR of 15 they're probably going
to be okay and they're functions of
course they're not going to be perfectly
fine but you're still going to be okay
once you reach this threshold you reach
a point where you really can't do your
normal activities as well as you should
be and so you are in need of a
transplant so when you give someone a
new kidney it's only going to last for a
certain period of time new kidneys don't
last forever it's not something that
you're gonna have with you forever
generally doctors hope that a good
kidney is going to last for somewhere
between ten and fifteen years so there
is a time limit on your new kidney
therefore you don't want to give a
patient a kidney when their own kidney
function is still okay and it's still
fine in many cases your own kidney is
going to be the best kidney for you so
we don't want to give someone a kidney
when they could still go on for some
time with the kidney that they already
have you want them to use their own
kidney to its maximum function because
their own kidney is gonna be the best
kidney for them so by giving a patient a
kidney when the GFR reaches fifteen we
are maximizing the amount of benefit and
increased lifespan that they're gonna
get from their new kidney in addition to
that undergoing transplant surgery is
not an easy task it's not something
simple and feasible that doesn't come
with risk transplant surgery just like
many other surgeries is going to have
big risks and so we don't want to put a
patient in surgery in a risky situation
that could cause them harm if they don't
really need it and then finally
something that you probably considered
first something which is most obvious is
that the NHS only has a finite amount of
resources they only have a finite amount
of money I need to realize and know
where they want to allocate that money
and on top of that of course the NHS
only has a finite amount of kidneys that
they can give as transplants so they
want to make sure that they're giving
those kidneys to the people that are
most in need to the people that have the
worst kidney function to the people to
have the lowest GFR you can't just give
a kidney to someone who says they wanted
the most now the next thing that we want
to tackle is that this woman said that
she wants a kidney transplant because
she wants to have a baby we don't give
her the kidney transplant can she have a
baby as she is right now and the answer
is absolutely no first and foremost her
function is already quite decreased and
when she ends up having a baby if she
does the toll that it's gonna take on
her body to carry another human being
inside of her is certainly going to
affect her kidneys and her kidneys
probably won't be able to keep up with
all that stress
second of all we know the patient is a
diabetic with type 1 diabetes and we
know that many patients with diabetes
have high blood pressure and high blood
pressure is one of the biggest risk
factors for kidney diseases and kidney
problems the reason being that kidneys
have very very small arteries leading to
them and very very small vasculature and
so when you try and pump blood at a very
high pressure through very small
arteries you end up causing a lot of
damage and that's why in diabetic
patients who also have high blood
pressure you end up seeing a lot of
complications in the eyes and in the
kidneys because those are the areas
where we have very very small
vasculature in addition to that pregnant
women are a risk of high blood pressure
for a number of reasons most notably is
a condition called preeclampsia which is
a condition that women get during
pregnancy and it causes you to have
increased protein in the urine raised
blood pressure and edema so the fact
that if she gets pregnant she could have
an additional risk of increased high
blood pressure is definitely not going
to help her kidneys on top of that women
when they get pregnant can also get
gestational diabetes which could also
lead to higher blood pressure
so generally pregnancy is a big risk for
her at this time since having a baby
would greatly increase the risks of
having further kidney damage this woman
should not get pregnant the next thing
that we want to tackle is does this
woman have an increased priority on the
transfer list so this woman is saying
that she really wants to be put on the
list because she wants to have a baby
ASAP does that mean that she should have
higher priority so hopefully you know
the answer to that question is no
patients do not get increased priority
on transplant lists just because they
want to or in fact based on any social
or desirable needs or once patients are
placed on transplant lists purely based
on clinical evaluation and that's
something that's very important and
crosses the board in medical
decision-making and medical ethics
clinical evaluation justness and
fairness are the leading drivers for
making these decisions there's actually
an objective point system that
determines how high on the priority list
you are for a kidney transplant and some
of the factors that they use to
determine your part
on that list it's your time since
diagnosis how long you've been on the
waiting list for your HL a match which
I'll explain in a second and the age
difference between the donor and the
recipient
HLA stands for human leukocyte antibody
and the importance of HLA matching is
that you need to match the immune system
of the donor to the immune system of the
recipient and the reason for that is
that if you insert a foreign object
let's say someone else's kidney into a
recipients body the recipient might
reject that for an object because it
will see it as foreign so you need to
make sure that the immune system of the
host matches the immune system of the
donor so that when the donor gives them
their kidney you don't reject it and the
reason HLA matching is involved in
determining your party on the list is
let's say that your immune system is
only match to one in a million kidneys
out there if that one in a million
kidney shows up then you should probably
get it as opposed to someone else who
has the HLA match with many many other
kidneys that could come up so how do you
approach this woman who's come to you
and said that I want to be on the
transplant list because I want to have a
baby as soon as possible
generally taking into account all of the
factors that we gave before we know that
her GFR is not low enough to warrant her
being put on the transplant kidney list
and so the most important thing to do
for this patient is to educate them you
want to tell them about the reasons why
we do choose a threshold to have a
certain GFR for patients can go on the
transfer list and why she does not meet
that threshold so hopefully explaining
all the things that we discuss to the
patient and talking to them about why it
is they need to reach a specific
threshold before you get put on the
transplant list will help them
understand the situation better now of
course in an ethical scenario they might
tell you that this patient is going to
get very mad at you this patients gonna
get very upset and they're gonna demand
that they get on the transplant list
ASAP these are kind of really difficult
situations to handle but generally you
always want to remain calm you always
want to remain in a position of
seriousness and you want to simply
explain and educate and say why it is
that we can't do this why it is that we
can't do that while trying to calm them
down and giving them as much information
as possible if they need it okay wow
this is actually turning out to be quite
a long case with a lot of complicated
topics so I don't think it's all gonna
fit in one video I'm gonna be splitting
this video into two parts so this is
part one the
song and part 2 will upload on the
channel soon let's say 150 likes we hit
150 likes on this video I'll upload part
2 something else that's important to
think about is the age of the patient
and a lot of the time and MMI interview
questions they will ask you the scenario
and then they'll say
see ya guys I hope you found this dose
useful I hope it's been helpful for your
MMI interview preparation and as always
I'll see you in the next video peace